---
layout: user_story
title: "Barry Commoner Center for Health & the Environment "
featured: true
image: /images/uploads/bcche.jpg
intro: '<a
  href="https://www.qc.cuny.edu/Academics/Centers/Biology/Pages/default.aspx">The
  Barry Commoner Center for Health and the Environment</a> is an environmental
  and occupational health research institute at Queens College, City University
  of New York. The mission of the Center is to identify and rectify
  environmental and occupational threats to human health. '
type: Researchers
order: 6
---
<p><a href="https://www.qc.cuny.edu/Academics/Centers/Biology/Pages/default.aspx">The Barry Commoner Center for Health and the Environment (BCCHE)</a> is an environmental and occupational health research institute at Queens College, City University of New York. The mission of the Center is to identify and rectify environmental and occupational threats to human health. BCCHE, in partnership with the New York City Dept of Health & Mental Hygiene, sought to understand how academic institutions, city governments, and community groups can work together to increase air quality monitoring within communities using citizen-collected data and enable communities to understand air pollution and its sources.</p>
<p>As a follow-up study from the <a href="https://www1.nyc.gov/site/doh/data/data-publications/air-quality-nyc-community-air-survey.page">New York City Community Air Survey</a>, the objectives behind this citizen science project were not just to address the gaps and concerns associated with institutional monitoring, but also to raise awareness of air quality on a community level. It focused on improving community-level engagement through direct public interaction and emphasized the importance of collaboration and establishing best practices for a scientific study when conducting a citizen science project. This was only possible with the direct involvement of the communities that are impacted by the existing environmental challenges in the areas studied.</p>
<p>In collaboration with two community-based organizations, <a href="https://elpuente.us/">El Puente de Williamsburg</a> and <a href="https://www.ympj.org/">Youth Ministries for Peace & Justice (YMPJ)</a>, BCCHE created a pilot community-based air quality monitoring network, whereby community members and project partners designed and implemented a stationary network to collect and share local air quality data using AirBeam2s. Utilizing the information collected through citizen science in conjunction with current city-wide air quality monitoring efforts, this partnership created a richer picture of neighborhood-level variation in air quality and thus provided communities with a better understanding of the air quality in their neighborhood. The community was involved in all aspects of the study, ranging from project design to implementation. Members of the community and high school students participated in both defining the study objectives and the collection of air quality data using low-cost sensor technology based on personal monitoring procedures. Key targets for the data collection on PM2.5 exposure included schools and playgrounds near major roadways. Project participants attended workshops and training sessions to better understand air pollution in their community and to learn how to use AirBeam2 to collect and analyze environmental data. BCCHE provided expertise in the review, analysis, and summaries of the data collected by the El Puente and YMPJ communities.</p>
<p>Understanding the spatial and temporal scales at which air quality affects people is critical for maintaining the overall health of a community. Due to the high cost and technical requirements associated with the regulatory-grade air quality monitors used by the New York State Dept of Environmental Conservation (NYSDEC), deployment of these monitors is spatially limited. This project intended to explore the feasibility of using low-cost air quality monitors to create a more accessible platform for measuring air quality. Based on the trade-off analysis for accuracy and cost, low-cost monitors have proven to be a good alternative to regulatory-grade air quality monitors for measuring air pollutant concentrations. The collaboration with NYSDEC, and having access to the NYSDEC monitoring locations, were invaluable during the design and testing phase of the low-cost air quality monitoring units. The result was a prototype for a low-cost air quality monitoring system, the Air Quality Monitor or AQM, that placed the AirBeam2 in a custom designed protective enclosure with a lead-acid battery pack as a power supply. The AQM enabled many devices to be installed throughout the targeted neighborhoods to increase the spatial and temporal resolution of the air quality data collected.</p>
<p>To learn more about this project <a href="https://www.researchgate.net/project/Citizen-Science-NYCCAS-New-York-City-Community-Air-Survey">check out these free publications available via ResearchGate</a>.</p>